micropython/README.md, before:

# MicroPython Build Container
This Docker container allows you to **build MicroPython firmware** for **various ports**. \
If you are using **ESP32** based board you should use [micropython_esp-idf](https://hub.docker.com/r/rav3nh01m/micropython_esp-idf). 

## Table of Contents

- [Supported MicroPython Versions](#supported-micropython-versions)
- [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)
- [Project layout](#project-layout)
- [Example Usage](#example-usage)

---

## Supported MicroPython versions
You can check which versions are available [here](https://hub.docker.com/r/rav3nh01m/micropython/tags). \
The **tag** is the **version** of MicroPyhon the container will build. \
**All packages are pre-installed.**

## Environment Variables
The container uses the following environment variables as input:

### Firmware configuration

- **PORT**
The MicroPython port to build.
Must be lowercase.

- **BOARD**
The target board for which the firmware is built.
**Must be uppercase** and must **exactly match** a directory name in: **micropython/ports/<PORT>/boards**

- **BOARD_VARIANT**
Some boards support variants (for example rp2 → WEACTSTUDIO).
If you **want to use** this variable, check the **available variants** for that specific board.

---

### Freezing files into firmware

- **FREEZE_MAIN** - **String** value: **"true"** or **"false"**. \
When **enabled**, main.py (if present) is **frozen** into the firmware. \
Useful for **flash-and-forget** deployments.

- **FREEZE_BOOT** - **String** value: **"true"** or **"false"**. \
When **enabled**, boot.py (if present) is **frozen** into the firmware. \
Useful for setting a **safe default state** of **board pins** in **flash-and-forget** deployments.

When **/modules** directory exists it's **content** is **frozen** relative to it. \
If you have module like /modules/test_module you should use **"import test_module"** or **"from text_module import ..."**

**When module with the same name exists in firmware and flash you'll receive an error.**

---

### Project directory

- **PROJECT_DIR** - Path to the **project directory**.

When running in CI/CD and the container is used as image the baked-in build_firmware.sh script will usually auto-detected and use the CI workspace. \
In "Woodpecker CI"
```yaml
- name: Build firmware
  image: rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
  environment:
    PORT: rp2
    BOARD: RPI_PICO_W
```
This will execute the baked-in build script and 

When the workflow uses DinD ( Docker in Docker) you should set the environment variable.
In "GitHub Actions:"
```yaml
- name: Run MicroPython build container
  run: |
    docker run --rm \
      -e PROJECT_DIR=/project \
      -v "$PWD:/project" \
      rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
```
**PROJECT_DIR value must be the same as the mount path in the container, in this case "/project".**

**If you use a custom build_firmware.sh, you must handle this yourself**.

---

### File ownership (DinD / CI support)
- **HOST_UID** - Host User ID.
- **HOST_GID** - Host Group ID.

The container runs as **root**, so **all** files **created** inside the container are **owned by root:root** by default. \
When using Docker-in-Docker (DinD), this can result in mixed ownership: \
Files created by the host (for example in GitHub Actions) are owned by the host runner. \
Files generated inside the container are owned by root:root \
When HOST_UID and/or HOST_GID are set, the baked-in firmware.sh script will recursively change ownership of the project directory \
and all its contents to: **HOST_UID:HOST_GID** \

If you are using "GitHub Actions" you can pass both UID and GID like this:
```yaml
- name: Run MicroPython build container
  run: |
    UID=$(id -u)
    GID=$(id -g)

    docker run --rm \
      -e HOST_UID=$UID \
      -e HOST_GID=$GID \
  ...
```
or:
```yaml
- name: Run MicroPython build container
  run: |
    docker run --rm \
      -e HOST_UID=$(id -u) \
      -e HOST_GID=$(id -g) \
  ...
```

This ensures generated files are writable and manageable by the workflow after the container exits.

## Project layout.
Your **project** should have this **layout**, if you **use** the **baked-in build script**.
- **/modules** – Modules that have to be frozen in the firmware. \
There is **no need** to create **manifest.py**; it is **generated** before each build **when the directory exists and is not empty**.

- **/lib** – Modules that are **not frozen** and has to be **uploaded** to the microcontroller. 

- **/main.py** – The entry point of the project.
To **freeze it in the firmware**, use **FREEZE_MAIN="true"**.

- **/boot.py** - (Optional) It is **executed before** main.py and is **used** to **set board pins** to **safe state**.
To **freeze it in the firmware**, use **FREEZE_BOOT="true"**.

- **/dist** – The output directory.
After a **successful** build the **firmware (.bin, .hex, or .uf2)** will appear here.

- **/build_firmware.sh** – If this **file exists** in your project, it will **override** the **integrated script** inside the container.

- **/manifest.py** – If this **file exists** in your project, it will be **used** as **manifest** when building the firmware. 

### Project root not in the repo root
If your **code** is **not** in the **root directory** of the repo then you should **mount** the directory \
**containing** the **main.py** file and/or **modules** directories. For example, if they are in **/src** use:
- **-v ./src:/project**
- **PROJECT_DIR=/project**

## Example usage
You can use this container both for [manual](#manual-build) builds or inside a [CI/CD](#cicd-build) pipeline. \
Check the way that CI/CD can use containers, "GitHub Actions" use DinD ( Docker-in-Docker ), \
while Woodpecker CI uses separate container for each step.

### Manual build
---

Pull the image:
```bash
docker pull rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
```

After that, run:
```bash
docker run --rm \
-e PROJECT_DIR="/project" \
-e PORT=rp2 \
-e BOARD=RPI_PICO2 \
-v ./:/project \
rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
```
The **path** you **mount** the project ( -v ./:**/project** ) must be the same as **PROJECT_DIR** ( -e PROJECT_DIR="**/project**").

---

Or if you want to freeze main.py:

```bash
docker run --rm \
-e PROJECT_DIR="/var/project" \
-e PORT=rp2 \
-e BOARD=RPI_PICO_W \
-e FREEZE_MAIN=true \
-v ./:/var/project \
rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
```
---
Or if you want to freeze boot.py:

```bash
docker run --rm \
-e PROJECT_DIR="/var/project" \
-e PORT=rp2 \
-e BOARD=RPI_PICO_W \
-e FREEZE_BOOT=true \
-v ./:/var/project \
rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
```
---

You can use **any version** of MicroPython **available** in the **set** by changing **latest** to the **version** you want. \
It should be like: **v1.xx.x** or **v1.xx**. You can see all available versions [here](https://hub.docker.com/r/rav3nh01m/micropython/tags).

---

After the **build completes**, the **firmware** will be in **/dist** relative to **PROJECT_DIR**. \
**-e PROJECT_DIR=<container_path>** \
**-v <host_path>:<container_path>**

The container path **must** be the **same** as **PROJECT_DIR**, unless you use **custom build_firmware.sh**.

### CI/CD build
You can use GitHub Actions, Woodpecker, GitLab CI or any other CI/CD system to set up automatic builds.

---

**Before pushing this workflow to GitHub you must create IMAGE_TAG, PORT and BOARD actions variables (not Environment).** \
If you want to **use environment variables** you should change **\${{ vars. }}** to **\${{ env. }}**
```yaml
name: Build firmware (upload artifact)

on:
  push:
    branches: [main]
  workflow_dispatch:

jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest    
    steps:
      # Checkout project code
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Set up Docker Buildx
        uses: docker/setup-buildx-action@v2

      # The IMAGE_TAG actions variable must be set before workflow push to main brach.
      # If you preffer using environment variables change "vars." to "env."
      # You can set them both in workflow "env:" section or in Settings > Secrets and variables > Actions
      - name: Determine Docker image
        id: docker_image
        run: |
          IMAGE_BASE="rav3nh01m/micropython"
          IMAGE="$IMAGE_BASE:${{ vars.IMAGE_TAG }}"

          echo "Checking for image: $IMAGE"

          if docker pull "$IMAGE"; then
            echo "Using image: $IMAGE"
          else
            echo "Image not found. Falling back to latest."
            IMAGE="$IMAGE_BASE:latest"
            docker pull "$IMAGE"
          fi

          echo "image=$IMAGE" >> "$GITHUB_OUTPUT"

      - name: Run MicroPython build container
        run: |
          docker run --rm \
            -e HOST_UID=$(id -u) \
            -e HOST_GID=$(id -g) \
            -e PROJECT_DIR=/project \
            -e BOARD="${{ vars.BOARD }}" \
#            -e FREEZE_BOOT="${{ vars.FREEZE_BOOT }}" \
#            -e FREEZE_MAIN="${{ vars.FREEZE_MAIN }}" \
            -v "$PWD:/project" \
            "${{ steps.docker_image.outputs.image }}"

      # Upload firmware artifacts
      - name: Upload firmware artifacts
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v3
        with:
          name: firmware
          path: dist/**
```
If you want to freeze main.py:
- Add FREEZE_MAIN with value "true" to workflow variables.
- Uncomment **#   -e FREEZE_MAIN="${{ vars.FREEZE_MAIN }}"** i.e remove "#". \
- Push the workflow to GitHub.

If you want to freeze main.py:
- Add FREEZE_BOOT with value "true" to workflow variables.
- Uncomment **#   -e FREEZE_BOOT="${{ vars.FREEZE_BOOT }}"** i.e remove "#". \
- Push the workflow to GitHub.

If you want to **use environment variables** instead change **\${{ vars. }}** to **\${{ env. }}**

---
You can **create automatic releases** of the firmware by using this workflow. 

You must also set:
- VERSION, MAJOR and MINOR actions variables to generate releases like v0.1.4.x\
where VERSION is 0, MAJOR is 1, MINOR is 4 and x is the workflow run number.
- IS_PRERELEASE - if you want to be able to have an easy way to change the prerelease flag of the release.

```yaml
name: Build and release

env:
  # The VERSION, MAJOR & MINOR actions variables must be set before workflow push to main brach.
  # You can set them in Settings > Secrets and variables > Actions | Variables |
  BUILD_VERSION: ${{ vars.VERSION }}.${{ vars.MAJOR }}.${{ vars.MINOR }}.${{ github.run_number }}

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main

jobs:
  build-and-release:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
        with:
          fetch-depth: 0

      - name: Set up Docker Buildx
        uses: docker/setup-buildx-action@v2

      - name: Determine Docker image
        id: docker_image
        run: |
          IMAGE_BASE="rav3nh01m/micropython"
          IMAGE="$IMAGE_BASE:${{ vars.IMAGE_TAG }}"

          echo "Checking for image: $IMAGE"

          if docker pull "$IMAGE"; then
            echo "Using image: $IMAGE"
          else
            echo "Image not found. Falling back to latest."
            IMAGE="$IMAGE_BASE:latest"
            docker pull "$IMAGE"
          fi

          echo "image=$IMAGE" >> "$GITHUB_OUTPUT"
      
      - name: Run MicroPython build container
        run: |
          docker run --rm \
            -e HOST_UID=$(id -u) \
            -e HOST_GID=$(id -g) \
            -e PROJECT_DIR=/project \
            -e BOARD="${{ vars.BOARD }}" \
#            -e FREEZE_BOOT="${{ vars.FREEZE_BOOT }}" \
#            -e FREEZE_MAIN="${{ vars.FREEZE_MAIN }}" \
            -v "$PWD:/project" \
            "${{ steps.docker_image.outputs.image }}"

      - name: Copy firmware with version in file name
        run: |
          mkdir -p release
          cp firmware.uf2 "release/firmware-v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}.uf2"

      - name: Create firmware zip
        working-directory: ./release
        run: zip -j firmware-v${{env.BUILD_VERSION}}.zip firmware-v${{env.BUILD_VERSION}}.uf2

      - name: Create code.zip
        run: |
          mkdir -p ./release/code
      
          if [ -d ".vscode" ]; then
            cp -R .vscode ./release/code/
            echo "Copied .vscode"
          else
            echo ".vscode directory not found — skipping"
          fi

          if [ -d "lib" ]; then
            cp -R lib ./release/code/
            echo "Copied lib"
          else
            echo "lib directory not found — skipping"
          fi
      # If you want you can add more directories or file to be ziped. 

      # Conditional step that handles where main.py is stored - firmware or code
      - name: Copy main.py (if not frozen)
        if: ${{ vars.FREEZE_MAIN != 'true' }}
        run: |
          if [ -f "main.py" ]; then
            cp main.py ./release/code/
            echo "Copied main.py"
          else
            echo "main.py not found — skipping"
          fi

      # Conditional step that handles where boot.py is stored - firmware or code
      - name: Copy boot.py (if not frozen)
        if: ${{ vars.FREEZE_BOOT != 'true' }}
        run: |
          if [ -f "boot.py" ]; then
            cp boot.py ./release/code/
            echo "Copied main.py"
          else
            echo "boot.py not found — skipping"
          fi

      - name: Create code zip
        working-directory: ./release/code
        run: zip -r ../code-v${{env.BUILD_VERSION}}.zip .

      # Make sure that you've set Settings > Actions > General - Workflow permissions to "Read and write permissions".
      # Also don't forget to press the "Save" button.
      - name: Authenticate Git
        run: git remote set-url origin https://x-access-token:${{secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN}}@github.com/${{github.repository}}

      - name: Create tag
        run: |
          git config user.name "github-actions"
          git config user.email "github-actions@github.com"
          git tag v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}
          git push origin v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}

      # Uploads files to release
      - name: Create Release
        uses: softprops/action-gh-release@v1
        with:
          tag_name: v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}
          name: Release v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}
          prerelease: ${{ vars.IS_PRERELEASE }}
          files: |
            ./release/firmware-v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}.zip
            ./release/code-v${{env.BUILD_VERSION}}.zip
        env:
          GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
```
**You must set Settings → Actions → General → Workflow permissions to Read/Write!** \
**This workflow creates a separate release for every push to main branch.**

To reset the workflow run number you can change the yaml file name. \
Use this workflow:
- Create the variables needed (IMAGE_TAG, PORT, BOARD, VERSION, MAJOR, MINOR, IS_PRERELEASE) and set their values.
- Create build-v{VERSION}.{MAJOR}.{MINOR}.x.yml as your workflow.
- Set workflow permissions to Read/Write.
- Press the "Save" button.
- Push the workflow to main branch.

You can reset the **run_number** for every version bump by:
- Change the values of the VERSION, MAJOR and MINOR variables.
- Rename the .yml to match the values of the variables.
- Push to main branch

With the value of **IS_PRERELEASE** you select if the build is full release or pre-release. \
The value **MUST** be set **BEFORE** the push to the **main branch!**

### VS Code setup
You can use this in .vscode/settings.json

```json
{
  "python.analysis.extraPaths": [
    "./lib",
    "./modules",
    "micropython-stdlib-stubs-1.27.0"
  ],
  "python.analysis.typeshedPaths": [
    "micropython-stdlib-stubs-1.27.0"
  ],
  "python.analysis.diagnosticSeverityOverrides": {
    "reportMissingModuleSource": "none"
  },
  "micropico.syncFolder": "",
  "micropico.additionalSyncFolders": [],
  "micropico.pyIgnore": [
    "**/.git",
    "**/.github",
    "**/.vscode",
    "**/env",
    "**/venv",
    "**/__pycache__",
    "**/modules"
  ],
  "micropico.syncFileTypes": [
    "py",
    "mpy",
    "json"
  ],
  "micropico.syncAllFileTypes": false
}
```
The micropython-stdlib-stubs version should match the version of micropython you intent to use. \
And in this case is installed using pip
```cmd
pip install micropython-stdlib-stubs==1.27.0
```

---
---
If you find this useful, consider buying me a beer 🍺 https://buymeacoffee.com/reaper.maxpayne

Commit message:

Added CI workspace auto-detect fail case.

micropython/README.md, after:

# MicroPython Build Container
This Docker container allows you to **build MicroPython firmware** for **various ports**. \
If you are using **ESP32** based board you should use [micropython_esp-idf](https://hub.docker.com/r/rav3nh01m/micropython_esp-idf). 

## Table of Contents

- [Supported MicroPython Versions](#supported-micropython-versions)
- [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)
- [Project layout](#project-layout)
- [Example Usage](#example-usage)

---

## Supported MicroPython versions
You can check which versions are available [here](https://hub.docker.com/r/rav3nh01m/micropython/tags). \
The **tag** is the **version** of MicroPyhon the container will build. \
**All packages are pre-installed.**

## Environment Variables
The container uses the following environment variables as input:

### Firmware configuration

- **PORT**
The MicroPython port to build.
Must be lowercase.

- **BOARD**
The target board for which the firmware is built.
**Must be uppercase** and must **exactly match** a directory name in: **micropython/ports/<PORT>/boards**

- **BOARD_VARIANT**
Some boards support variants (for example rp2 → WEACTSTUDIO).
If you **want to use** this variable, check the **available variants** for that specific board.

---

### Freezing files into firmware

- **FREEZE_MAIN** - **String** value: **"true"** or **"false"**. \
When **enabled**, main.py (if present) is **frozen** into the firmware. \
Useful for **flash-and-forget** deployments.

- **FREEZE_BOOT** - **String** value: **"true"** or **"false"**. \
When **enabled**, boot.py (if present) is **frozen** into the firmware. \
Useful for setting a **safe default state** of **board pins** in **flash-and-forget** deployments.

When **/modules** directory exists it's **content** is **frozen** relative to it. \
If you have module like /modules/test_module you should use **"import test_module"** or **"from text_module import ..."**

**When module with the same name exists in firmware and flash you'll receive an error.**

---

### Project directory

- **PROJECT_DIR** - Path to the **project directory**.

When running in CI/CD and the container is used as image the baked-in build_firmware.sh script will usually auto-detected and use the CI workspace. \
In "Woodpecker CI"
```yaml
- name: Build firmware
  image: rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
  environment:
    PORT: rp2
    BOARD: RPI_PICO_W
```

This will execute the baked-in build script and generated .bin, .hex or .uf2 files (dependong on port/board) will be in /dist directory relative to CI workspace.
If you receive un error add PROJECT_DIR environment variable and mount the CI workspace using:
```yaml
- name: Build firmware
  image: rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
  environment:
    PORT: rp2
    BOARD: RPI_PICO_W
    PROJECT_DIR: /project
  volumes:
    ${CI_WORKSPACE}:/project
```


When the workflow uses DinD ( Docker in Docker) you should set the environment variable.
In "GitHub Actions:"
```yaml
- name: Run MicroPython build container
  run: |
    docker run --rm \
      -e PROJECT_DIR=/project \
      -v "$PWD:/project" \
      rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
```
**PROJECT_DIR value must be the same as the mount path in the container, in this case "/project".**

**If you use a custom build_firmware.sh, you must handle this yourself**.

---

### File ownership (DinD / CI support)
- **HOST_UID** - Host User ID.
- **HOST_GID** - Host Group ID.

The container runs as **root**, so **all** files **created** inside the container are **owned by root:root** by default. \
When using Docker-in-Docker (DinD), this can result in mixed ownership: \
Files created by the host (for example in GitHub Actions) are owned by the host runner. \
Files generated inside the container are owned by root:root \
When HOST_UID and/or HOST_GID are set, the baked-in firmware.sh script will recursively change ownership of the project directory \
and all its contents to: **HOST_UID:HOST_GID** \

If you are using "GitHub Actions" you can pass both UID and GID like this:
```yaml
- name: Run MicroPython build container
  run: |
    UID=$(id -u)
    GID=$(id -g)

    docker run --rm \
      -e HOST_UID=$UID \
      -e HOST_GID=$GID \
  ...
```
or:
```yaml
- name: Run MicroPython build container
  run: |
    docker run --rm \
      -e HOST_UID=$(id -u) \
      -e HOST_GID=$(id -g) \
  ...
```

This ensures generated files are writable and manageable by the workflow after the container exits.

## Project layout.
Your **project** should have this **layout**, if you **use** the **baked-in build script**.
- **/modules** – Modules that have to be frozen in the firmware. \
There is **no need** to create **manifest.py**; it is **generated** before each build **when the directory exists and is not empty**.

- **/lib** – Modules that are **not frozen** and has to be **uploaded** to the microcontroller. 

- **/main.py** – The entry point of the project.
To **freeze it in the firmware**, use **FREEZE_MAIN="true"**.

- **/boot.py** - (Optional) It is **executed before** main.py and is **used** to **set board pins** to **safe state**.
To **freeze it in the firmware**, use **FREEZE_BOOT="true"**.

- **/dist** – The output directory.
After a **successful** build the **firmware (.bin, .hex, or .uf2)** will appear here.

- **/build_firmware.sh** – If this **file exists** in your project, it will **override** the **integrated script** inside the container.

- **/manifest.py** – If this **file exists** in your project, it will be **used** as **manifest** when building the firmware. 

### Project root not in the repo root
If your **code** is **not** in the **root directory** of the repo then you should **mount** the directory \
**containing** the **main.py** file and/or **modules** directories. For example, if they are in **/src** use:
- **-v ./src:/project**
- **PROJECT_DIR=/project**

## Example usage
You can use this container both for [manual](#manual-build) builds or inside a [CI/CD](#cicd-build) pipeline. \
Check the way that CI/CD can use containers, "GitHub Actions" use DinD ( Docker-in-Docker ), \
while Woodpecker CI uses separate container for each step.

### Manual build
---

Pull the image:
```bash
docker pull rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
```

After that, run:
```bash
docker run --rm \
-e PROJECT_DIR="/project" \
-e PORT=rp2 \
-e BOARD=RPI_PICO2 \
-v ./:/project \
rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
```
The **path** you **mount** the project ( -v ./:**/project** ) must be the same as **PROJECT_DIR** ( -e PROJECT_DIR="**/project**").

---

Or if you want to freeze main.py:

```bash
docker run --rm \
-e PROJECT_DIR="/var/project" \
-e PORT=rp2 \
-e BOARD=RPI_PICO_W \
-e FREEZE_MAIN=true \
-v ./:/var/project \
rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
```
---
Or if you want to freeze boot.py:

```bash
docker run --rm \
-e PROJECT_DIR="/var/project" \
-e PORT=rp2 \
-e BOARD=RPI_PICO_W \
-e FREEZE_BOOT=true \
-v ./:/var/project \
rav3nh01m/micropython:latest
```
---

You can use **any version** of MicroPython **available** in the **set** by changing **latest** to the **version** you want. \
It should be like: **v1.xx.x** or **v1.xx**. You can see all available versions [here](https://hub.docker.com/r/rav3nh01m/micropython/tags).

---

After the **build completes**, the **firmware** will be in **/dist** relative to **PROJECT_DIR**. \
**-e PROJECT_DIR=<container_path>** \
**-v <host_path>:<container_path>**

The container path **must** be the **same** as **PROJECT_DIR**, unless you use **custom build_firmware.sh**.

### CI/CD build
You can use GitHub Actions, Woodpecker, GitLab CI or any other CI/CD system to set up automatic builds.

---

**Before pushing this workflow to GitHub you must create IMAGE_TAG, PORT and BOARD actions variables (not Environment).** \
If you want to **use environment variables** you should change **\${{ vars. }}** to **\${{ env. }}**
```yaml
name: Build firmware (upload artifact)

on:
  push:
    branches: [main]
  workflow_dispatch:

jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest    
    steps:
      # Checkout project code
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Set up Docker Buildx
        uses: docker/setup-buildx-action@v2

      # The IMAGE_TAG actions variable must be set before workflow push to main brach.
      # If you preffer using environment variables change "vars." to "env."
      # You can set them both in workflow "env:" section or in Settings > Secrets and variables > Actions
      - name: Determine Docker image
        id: docker_image
        run: |
          IMAGE_BASE="rav3nh01m/micropython"
          IMAGE="$IMAGE_BASE:${{ vars.IMAGE_TAG }}"

          echo "Checking for image: $IMAGE"

          if docker pull "$IMAGE"; then
            echo "Using image: $IMAGE"
          else
            echo "Image not found. Falling back to latest."
            IMAGE="$IMAGE_BASE:latest"
            docker pull "$IMAGE"
          fi

          echo "image=$IMAGE" >> "$GITHUB_OUTPUT"

      - name: Run MicroPython build container
        run: |
          docker run --rm \
            -e HOST_UID=$(id -u) \
            -e HOST_GID=$(id -g) \
            -e PROJECT_DIR=/project \
            -e PORT=${{ vars.PORT }}
            -e BOARD="${{ vars.BOARD }}" \
#            -e FREEZE_BOOT="${{ vars.FREEZE_BOOT }}" \
#            -e FREEZE_MAIN="${{ vars.FREEZE_MAIN }}" \
            -v "$PWD:/project" \
            "${{ steps.docker_image.outputs.image }}"

      # Upload firmware artifacts
      - name: Upload firmware artifacts
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v3
        with:
          name: firmware
          path: dist/**
```
If you want to freeze main.py:
- Add FREEZE_MAIN with value "true" to workflow variables.
- Uncomment **#   -e FREEZE_MAIN="${{ vars.FREEZE_MAIN }}"** i.e remove "#". \
- Push the workflow to GitHub.

If you want to freeze main.py:
- Add FREEZE_BOOT with value "true" to workflow variables.
- Uncomment **#   -e FREEZE_BOOT="${{ vars.FREEZE_BOOT }}"** i.e remove "#". \
- Push the workflow to GitHub.

If you want to **use environment variables** instead change **\${{ vars. }}** to **\${{ env. }}**

---
You can **create automatic releases** of the firmware by using this workflow. 

You must also set:
- VERSION, MAJOR and MINOR actions variables to generate releases like v0.1.4.x\
where VERSION is 0, MAJOR is 1, MINOR is 4 and x is the workflow run number.
- IS_PRERELEASE - if you want to be able to have an easy way to change the prerelease flag of the release.

```yaml
name: Build and release

env:
  # The VERSION, MAJOR & MINOR actions variables must be set before workflow push to main brach.
  # You can set them in Settings > Secrets and variables > Actions | Variables |
  BUILD_VERSION: ${{ vars.VERSION }}.${{ vars.MAJOR }}.${{ vars.MINOR }}.${{ github.run_number }}

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main

jobs:
  build-and-release:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
        with:
          fetch-depth: 0

      - name: Set up Docker Buildx
        uses: docker/setup-buildx-action@v2

      - name: Determine Docker image
        id: docker_image
        run: |
          IMAGE_BASE="rav3nh01m/micropython"
          IMAGE="$IMAGE_BASE:${{ vars.IMAGE_TAG }}"

          echo "Checking for image: $IMAGE"

          if docker pull "$IMAGE"; then
            echo "Using image: $IMAGE"
          else
            echo "Image not found. Falling back to latest."
            IMAGE="$IMAGE_BASE:latest"
            docker pull "$IMAGE"
          fi

          echo "image=$IMAGE" >> "$GITHUB_OUTPUT"
      
      - name: Run MicroPython build container
        run: |
          docker run --rm \
            -e HOST_UID=$(id -u) \
            -e HOST_GID=$(id -g) \
            -e PROJECT_DIR=/project \
            -e PORT="${{ vars.PORT }}" \
            -e BOARD="${{ vars.BOARD }}" \
#            -e FREEZE_BOOT="${{ vars.FREEZE_BOOT }}" \
#            -e FREEZE_MAIN="${{ vars.FREEZE_MAIN }}" \
            -v "$PWD:/project" \
            "${{ steps.docker_image.outputs.image }}"

      - name: Copy firmware with version in file name
        run: |
          mkdir -p release
          cp firmware.uf2 "release/firmware-v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}.uf2"

      - name: Create firmware zip
        working-directory: ./release
        run: zip -j firmware-v${{env.BUILD_VERSION}}.zip firmware-v${{env.BUILD_VERSION}}.uf2

      - name: Create code.zip
        run: |
          mkdir -p ./release/code
      
          if [ -d ".vscode" ]; then
            cp -R .vscode ./release/code/
            echo "Copied .vscode"
          else
            echo ".vscode directory not found — skipping"
          fi

          if [ -d "lib" ]; then
            cp -R lib ./release/code/
            echo "Copied lib"
          else
            echo "lib directory not found — skipping"
          fi
      # If you want you can add more directories or file to be ziped. 

      # Conditional step that handles where main.py is stored - firmware or code
      - name: Copy main.py (if not frozen)
        if: ${{ vars.FREEZE_MAIN != 'true' }}
        run: |
          if [ -f "main.py" ]; then
            cp main.py ./release/code/
            echo "Copied main.py"
          else
            echo "main.py not found — skipping"
          fi

      # Conditional step that handles where boot.py is stored - firmware or code
      - name: Copy boot.py (if not frozen)
        if: ${{ vars.FREEZE_BOOT != 'true' }}
        run: |
          if [ -f "boot.py" ]; then
            cp boot.py ./release/code/
            echo "Copied main.py"
          else
            echo "boot.py not found — skipping"
          fi

      - name: Create code zip
        working-directory: ./release/code
        run: zip -r ../code-v${{env.BUILD_VERSION}}.zip .

      # Make sure that you've set Settings > Actions > General - Workflow permissions to "Read and write permissions".
      # Also don't forget to press the "Save" button.
      - name: Authenticate Git
        run: git remote set-url origin https://x-access-token:${{secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN}}@github.com/${{github.repository}}

      - name: Create tag
        run: |
          git config user.name "github-actions"
          git config user.email "github-actions@github.com"
          git tag v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}
          git push origin v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}

      # Uploads files to release
      - name: Create Release
        uses: softprops/action-gh-release@v1
        with:
          tag_name: v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}
          name: Release v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}
          prerelease: ${{ vars.IS_PRERELEASE }}
          files: |
            ./release/firmware-v${{ env.BUILD_VERSION }}.zip
            ./release/code-v${{env.BUILD_VERSION}}.zip
        env:
          GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
```
**You must set Settings → Actions → General → Workflow permissions to Read/Write!** \
**This workflow creates a separate release for every push to main branch.**

To reset the workflow run number you can change the yaml file name. \
Use this workflow:
- Create the variables needed (IMAGE_TAG, PORT, BOARD, VERSION, MAJOR, MINOR, IS_PRERELEASE) and set their values.
- Create build-v{VERSION}.{MAJOR}.{MINOR}.x.yml as your workflow.
- Set workflow permissions to Read/Write.
- Press the "Save" button.
- Push the workflow to main branch.

You can reset the **run_number** for every version bump by:
- Change the values of the VERSION, MAJOR and MINOR variables.
- Rename the .yml to match the values of the variables.
- Push to main branch

With the value of **IS_PRERELEASE** you select if the build is full release or pre-release. \
The value **MUST** be set **BEFORE** the push to the **main branch!**

### VS Code setup
You can use this in .vscode/settings.json

```json
{
  "python.analysis.extraPaths": [
    "./lib",
    "./modules",
    "micropython-stdlib-stubs-1.27.0"
  ],
  "python.analysis.typeshedPaths": [
    "micropython-stdlib-stubs-1.27.0"
  ],
  "python.analysis.diagnosticSeverityOverrides": {
    "reportMissingModuleSource": "none"
  },
  "micropico.syncFolder": "",
  "micropico.additionalSyncFolders": [],
  "micropico.pyIgnore": [
    "**/.git",
    "**/.github",
    "**/.vscode",
    "**/env",
    "**/venv",
    "**/__pycache__",
    "**/modules"
  ],
  "micropico.syncFileTypes": [
    "py",
    "mpy",
    "json"
  ],
  "micropico.syncAllFileTypes": false
}
```
The micropython-stdlib-stubs version should match the version of micropython you intent to use. \
And in this case is installed using pip
```cmd
pip install micropython-stdlib-stubs==1.27.0
```

---
---
If you find this useful, consider buying me a beer 🍺 https://buymeacoffee.com/reaper.maxpayne
